[ENH] BEP001 - Quantitative MRI (#508)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.md

```Text
sub-<label>/[ses-<label>/]
    anat/
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_part-<label>][_echo-<index>][_fa-<index>][_inv-<index>][_mt-<on/off>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_<suffix>.nii[.gz]

>         sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_part-<label>][_echo-<index>][_fa-<index>][_inv-<index>][_mt-<on/off>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>][_mod-<suffix>]_defacemask.nii[.gz]

Reviewer: I wonder if `fa-` entity has a danger of confusion with fractional anisotropy, which seems likely to end up being a suffix (though it may be capitalized to `FA`). Would `flip-` be clear? Or could it potentially clash with some other concept?

Reviewer 2: Relying on the case to differentiate 'fa' from 'FA' seems very unsafe...
Now the 'FA' derived from DWI data will appear as a suffis, indicating the nature of the map, while the 'fa-' here is an indexable key appearing in the filename. So what is the actual risk of confusing them?

Reviewer: I need to check back whether we've explicitly excluded overlap of suffix and entity in the past. If we haven't done that, then it's probably not a problem, but I wanted to flag this while I was thinking about it.

Reviewer 3: How about being explicit and replacing `fa-` with `excitationflipangle-` and `-FA` with `fractionalanisotropy-`. Is there a limit  to the number of characters for BIDS filenames?

Reviewer: No limit, but that would definitely annoy people.

Reviewer 3: Ok then. I don't think `flip-` wouldn't be clear. How about `angle-`?

Reviewer 4: Most manuscripts use FA for flip angle (and for fractional anisotropy).

Reviewer 3: Also, is there a compiled database of terms already used in BIDS (or in the planning stage) that we could search through, to make sure that we're not using any terms that another BEP is working on? Or maybe a parameter/flag/etc name booking system for BIDS development? For example I know QSM and T2* imaging can be head orientation dependent, so they might be planning to use the term `angle` already? But going through all BEPs manually isn't really feasible to make sure.

Reviewer 4: I agree with @ChristophePhillips, and I think we can rely on that amount of heuristic.

Reviewer 4: @mathieuboudreau, I think it is a very hard and convoluted task. I would say 'first come - first served'. :)

Reviewer: @mathieuboudreau #423 and #466 are pushing in that direction. I'm not sure what the status of each is.

Reviewer 3: @tiborauer that makes sense. If that's the case, I'd vote for FA = flip angle and hope this BEP gets merged before the diffusion one does? If diffusion gets merged before this BEP, then we could just switch it to `flip-` or `angle-` then.

Reviewer 4: I think both `_FA` and `fa-` can live in one spec, as @ChristophePhillips pointed out.

Reviewer 5: Hey everybody, apologies for being silent on this issue for so long. It's a tricky question and we want to set a good precedent for future BEPs, so we have been discussing this in the maintainers group and want to also discuss with the steering group to be clear about our options. The next steering group meeting is on the 30th, so it'll take some more time to resolve this ... but it's important to get this right.

Reviewer 3: Glad it's a priority and you're working on it! It would be unfortunate to introduce another naming issue inconstant with the MRI literature (see: "TR" problem)

Reviewer 6: Per yesterday's call, the BEP team will change `fa-<index>` to `flip-<index>`, so I think I'll resolve this thread. Please reopen if I've done so prematurely.

```

The term anatomical imaging data pertains to a broad range of MRI applications that provide structural 
information about (brain) anatomy, but differ by the nature of the data they contain. Anatomical
(structural) data for a participant may refer to three types of data:
1. a single image with specific weighting on an arbitrary scale (e.g. a 3D high resolution T1-weighted image).
This type is most commonly used in neuroimaging applications.
2. a group of images acquired within a single protocol for the purpose of improving contrast 
characteristics (e.g., a set of multi-echo anatomical GRE images) or calculating quantitative maps

> (e.g. four 3D volumes provided as an input to an MP2RAGE calculation) 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
(e.g. four 3D volumes provided as an input to an MP2RAGE calculation). 
```

3. a quantitative map of which the intensities are put on an absolute scales (e.g., seconds for a T1 map).
These images are generally produced by some mathematical operation on images from class 2.

#### Conventional structural acquisitions

Anatomical images of this type typically refer to a volumetric high-resolution 
dataset, representing the measured MRI signal in an arbitrary scale of "gray

> shades". Contrast factor of these grayscale images depend on the relative contribution

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
shades". Contrast factor of these grayscale images depends on the relative contribution
```
(or contrast factor**s**

of inherent tissue parameters (e.g. `T1`, `T2` and `PD`) to the measured signal. 

Contribution weights of these parameters are determined by the type of acquisition
sequence (e.g. `spin-` or `gradient-echo`) and the setting of various parameters
(e.g. `Repetition Time`, `Echo Time`, `Inversion Time` and `Flip Angle`). For 
example, in a spoiled gradient-echo scan, keeping the repetition and the echo time 
short with a relatively large flip angle increases the contribution of `T1` effects
to the image contrast, yielding a primarily T1-weighted image.

#### Grouped scan collections for contrast improvement or quantitative map calculation

A group of anatomical scans may be collected to enhance certain contrast features,

> such as to calculate a weighted average of multi-echo gradient echo (`MEGRE`) images,

Reviewer 6: Wouldn't multi-echo GRE images be acquired in the same scan?

Reviewer 7: Fair point. This is actually also true for, e.g., `MP2RAGE` (multiple inversion times after the same pulse).

Maybe 

```
A group of multiple anatomical images may be collected to enhance certain contrast features,
```

What do you think?

qMRI processing, the `_<suffix>` indicates the collection that the scans belong to.

#### The `_suffix` entity

To ensure an comprehensible, human readable directory that contains anatomical 
imaging data, the `_<suffix>` entity can be used in one of three ways:

1. Conventional MRI suffixes
2. Grouping suffixes
3. Quantitative MRI (qMRI) map suffixes

This distinction was added to the specification on acceptance of the BEP001 
proposal in version `1.4.0`. However, as a result, some  suffixes that were introduced
into BIDS at an earlier point time are inconsistent with this typology: for example 
because they are linked to a readout-sequence rather than a contrast, or because 
they don't clearly distinguish between a quantitative map or a contrast-weighted 
image. These `legacy`-suffixes are no longer recommended but remain part of the 
specification in order to maintain backwards compatability with previous versions 
of the specification.

These can be found in the [legacy suffixes](#legacy-suffixes) subsection.

Previous versions of the specification used the term `modality_label` instead of 
`_suffix` to represent this entity. The change in term was introduced in version 

> `1.4.0.` to accodomate a broad definition of anatomical imaging applications.

Reviewer 6: I think this may reflect terminology from an older version of BIDS. Suffix is defined in item 11 of [Common principles#Definitions](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/02-common-principles.html#definitions).

##### Conventional MRI suffixes

> **Function:**

Reviewer 8: Is function the best word here?  That is, within the qMRI community is "function" a unique and unambiguous term for the predominant contrast in an image?   If not, consider change to "Predominant contrast" or some other term that will not be confused with the dominant interpretation related to the term "functional."
```suggestion
**Purpose:**
```

Reviewer 9: @Gilles86 - if you give this a :+1: vote then I think we can go ahead and commit

Reviewer 7: Yes, but then also downstairs at qmri map suffixes

Example use for conventional **T1 weighted images**:

```Text
sub-01_run-1_T1w.nii.gz
sub-01_run-1_T1w.json
sub-01_run-2_T1w.nii.gz
sub-01_run-2_T1w.json
```

The `run` entity in the example above denotes the index of the acquisition
repeated with the identical scan parameters (e.g., to achieve a higher SNR by averaging the scans together).
Note that changing parameters between multiple acquisitions of the same sequence
creates a different use case: **grouped scan collections**. For more information see
the [grouping suffixes](#grouping-suffixes) subsection.

**Important:**

If an anatomical image is defaced for anonymization, one MAY provide
the binary mask that was used to remove facial features. In the specific case of
naming this binary mask, the `_<suffix>` entity is replaced by `_<defacemask>` entry.
Therefore, to contain the original `_<suffix>` entry, the OPTIONAL `mod-<suffix>`
entity is used. For example, deface mask image belonging to a **T1 weighted image** is named as follows:

```
sub-01_mod-T1w_defacemask.nii.gz
sub-01_mod-T1w_defacemask.json
```
##### Grouping suffixes

> **Function:**

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
**Purpose:**
```

Reviewer 7: @KirstieJane ?

| Multi-echo spin echo                       | MESE    | Grouping | The MESE method involves multiple spin echo images acquired at different echo times and is primarily used for T2 mapping. _Associated output suffixes_: T2map, R2map, MWFmap                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

> | Multi-echo gradient echo                   | MEGRE   | Grouping | Anatomical gradient echo images acquired at different echo times. _Associated output suffixes_: T2starmap, R2starmap                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer 6: What is the distinction between `MEGRE` and `GRE` (e.g., as proposed in [BEP-004](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1kyw9mGgacNqeMbp4xZet3RnDhcMmf4_BmRgKaOkO2Sc/edit?pli=1) with an echo entity?

Reviewer 7: This came up before. I think the reason we introduce `MEGRE` is that a single-echo GRE is usually meant to be either T1-, T2*, or PD-weighted, without any further qMRI-ish processing. Thus, a data set curator can communicate the weighting and intended use-case using the suffixes `_T1w`, `_T2starw`, and `_PDw`.

For the multi-echo GREs, you usually move from a PDw to a T2starw with longer echo times in a single scan. Thus, most of those images are neither T2*w, nor PDw. Moreover, you usually want to combine them in further computational processing pipelines (e.g., make a `T2starmap`). They are a typical case of a "grouped scan collection".

However, you make a valid point. The multi-echo part can already be communicated by having `echo-` key/value pairs. I'm personally not married to the `_MEGRE`-solution. @tsalo, what do you think about this now?

Reviewer 4: The same applies to `MESE`.

Reviewer 4: As @Gilles86 mentions, `MEGRE `and `MESE` are Grouing rather then Conventional suffixes, so they denote certain processing. As such they are helpful for tool developers rather than end-users. I also agree that there is a redundancy here.

Author: @tiborauer
>  perhaps all grouping suffixes could be omitted and substituted by a combination of entities.

I don't think that there is a way to omit grouping suffixes altogether and solve the problem with a combination of entities. Neither for more  involved descriptions such as `MPM`, nor for the relatively simplistic `GRE` and `MEGRE` case. 

We may assume that `sub-01_echo-1_GRE.nii.gz` and `sub-01_echo-1_MESE.nii` would be interchangeable, until there is a `sub-01_GRE.nii.gz` is present in the same dataset. Whereas `MESE` ensures that the file attains an `echo` entity and does not orphan any files. 

The usefulness of `GRE` as a suffix, I think, is a discussion of its own. Suffixes were meant to identify images with similar contrasts across datasets. As @Gilles86 pointed out, `sub-N_GRE.nii.gz` from `ds-001` can be different than  `sub-N_GRE.nii.gz` from ds-002` in terms of weighting, whereas `T1w`, `PDw` etc. can resolve such violation of interchangeable contrast.

Reviewer 4: @agahkarakuzu
I agree with you. I am a fan of the groupping suffixes, but I want(ed) to point out that they serve a different purpose than Conventional suffixes, which are "were meant to identify images with similar contrasts across datasets". We should, perhaps, call Conventional suffixes Contrast suffixes.

From the POV of representing contrast, `sub-01_echo-1_GRE.nii.gz` and `sub-01_echo-1_MEGRE.nii` could potentially represent the very same data. So there is a redundancy for this use case, and the **data producing user** may be confused which to use.
On the other hand, from the POV of representing processing (requirement), `sub-01_echo-1_GRE.nii.gz` and `sub-01_echo-1_MEGRE.nii` are not equivalent for several reasons:
- As you pointed out, contrast MUST NOT be automatically assumed fro MEGRE
- MERGE MAY/SHOULD be processed (and in combination with the other images with MEGRE suffix).
So for a **data consumer user** , these suffixes are highly informative and even instructuctive.

Reviewer 6: > For the multi-echo GREs, you usually move from a PD-weighted to a T2*-weighted image with longer echo times in a single scan. Thus, most of those images are neither T2*-, nor PD-weighted. Moreover, you usually want to combine them in further computational processing pipelines (e.g., make a T2starmap). They are a typical use-case of a "grouped scan collection".

@Gilles86 Thank you. I can see the use of "grouped scan collections" for specific protocols, although I don't think naming them according to the varying parameter is good. For example, VFA seems to have more requirements than just a varying flip angle, but you could have another scan type with a varying flip angle and it's unclear what you would name it given how generic the name "VFA" is. 

However, if the only distinction for a given suffix _is_ the varying parameter (as with MESE, MEGRE, MTS, and MPM), then it seems like they should just use entities and some generic suffix (e.g., SE, GRE) to delineate themselves.

> We may assume that `sub-01_echo-1_GRE.nii.gz` and `sub-01_echo-1_MESE.nii` would be interchangeable, until there is a sub-01_GRE.nii.gz is present in the same dataset. Whereas MESE ensures that the file attains an echo entity and does not orphan any files.

@agahkarakuzu Can you clarify what you mean by orphaning files? 

I'm trying to extend this to what I'm already familiar with, such as single-echo and multi-echo EPI data. I understand that there is a crucial difference between EPI and MEGRE data here, in that with EPI there is the assumption of interchangeability. You can analyze a single echo from EPI data and, while it might not be the _optimal_ echo time, it should still work, while the same isn't true of MEGRE. At least that's my understanding based on the BEP.

Still, that doesn't explain to me why one would need grouping suffixes instead of generic suffixes in conjunction with entities. If we want to estimate T2* from EPI data with `tedana`, then we need multi-echo EPI data. `tedana` can't run on single-echo data, so from a tool developer perspective we do need some way to identify appropriate files, but all we need to do is check for the `echo` entity with the `bold` suffix. Whether multi-echo-specific processing is necessary or optional for a given output doesn't necessarily need to be a concern for the specification, and could be documented in the qMRI documentation also included in this PR (e.g., the `Table of method-specific priority levels for qMRI metadata` in Appendix 9).

Let's say you acquire GRE data with both multiple echoes and multiple flip angles. You should be able to run the same pipeline on it as you would on MEGRE data, as long as you select the most appropriate `fa` files, but it's unclear to me whether you would still use MEGRE or need a new suffix. 

> I agree with you. I am a fan of the groupping suffixes, but I want(ed) to point out that they serve a different purpose than Conventional suffixes, which are "meant to identify images with similar contrasts across datasets". We should, perhaps, call Conventional suffixes Contrast suffixes.

@tiborauer Absolutely, I love that idea! That does make the distinction much clearer- at least for reflecting the assumption of interchangeability.

I think "Grouping" would also be clearer as "Non-Contrast" or something. For me, the term "grouping suffix" is confusing. Any suffix can refer to a group of files acquired at the same time, as it's the entities that determine whether data from the same scan is spread across multiple files or not. Some entities represent information from the same acquisition (e.g., `echo`, `part`, `fa`, and hopefully `ch` at some point), while others separate acquisitions (e.g., `sub`, `ses`, `run`). The entities that do represent when data from the same scan are split across multiple files can be applied to many suffixes that I'm sure you wouldn't count as "grouping," like `_bold` (even though you _could_ use multi-echo EPI data to estimate T2* in seconds, matching with qMRI).

The distinction is whether there's an inherent contrast or if you need multiple files to produce one, right? So "Non-Contrast" or "Contrast-Free" or something similar makes more sense to me.

Reviewer 4: +1 for "Contrast" and "Non-Contrast"

Author: @tsalo 

> For example, VFA seems to have more requirements than just a varying flip angle, but you could have another scan type with a varying flip angle and it's unclear what you would name it given how generic the name "VFA" is.

`VFA` is a commonly used term (at least in ISMRM community), it is mostly referred to as `VFA framework` (a [quick reference](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5082493/) I hit when I search the term). Depending on the sequence type, or some other parameters that are not necessarily varying, the outputs of the `VFA` application changes (e.g. DESPOT1, DESPOT2, MCDESPOT, DAM ,...).  

> However, if the only distinction for a given suffix is the varying parameter

There are different conventions to the naming of the qMRI methods. Even when they have relatively more generic names, such as `VFA` , they denote the qMRI application by means of the sequence (if the sequence is designed for quantitative mapping [`MP2RAGE`, `SA2RAGE`], altered parameters [`double angle method`, `VFA`], type of outputs [`MPM`], or special names  [`Bloch-Siegert B1 mapping`, `DESPOT1-HIFI`, `AFI` etc.].

> Still, that doesn't explain to me why one would need grouping suffixes instead of generic suffixes in conjunction with entities. 

Let's come up with a generic suffix name that can apply to a variety of qMRI methods: `FLASH`, or `GRE`, does not matter (just misses the point that the sequences are spoiled). If we don't bother that `FLASH` is vendor specific for the sake of the example, the following cases should make clear why generic names can get easily confusing. 

i)  Double angle B1 mapping 
```
sub-01_fa-1_FLASH.nii.gz
sub-01_fa-2_FLASH.nii.gz
```
OK, these inputs would go into the `fmap` folder, but in future a new method would create a similar duality in the `anat` folder.

ii) VFA T1 mapping  
```
sub-01_fa-1_FLASH.nii.gz
sub-01_fa-2_FLASH.nii.gz
```

iii) MPM
```
sub-01_echo-1_fa-1_mt-on_FLASH.nii.gz
sub-01_echo-1_fa-1_mt-off_FLASH.nii.gz
sub-01_echo-1_fa-2_mt-off_FLASH.nii.gz
```
Note that not necessarily multi- echo. 

iv) MTsat
```
sub-01_fa-1_mt-on_FLASH.nii.gz
sub-01_fa-1_mt-off_FLASH.nii.gz
sub-01_fa-2_mt-off_FLASH.nii.gz
```
This can be multi-echo as well. 

v) MTR
```
sub-01_fa-1_mt-on_FLASH.nii.gz
sub-01_fa-1_mt-off_FLASH.nii.gz
```

These are just a few examples off the top of my head, that are going to overlap with each other. That's why we need grouping suffixes for sensible delineation of these input files. Many qMRI methods revolve around a similar frameworks. Sometimes one method differs from another at the pulse sequence level (e.g. `MTsat` vs `MPM`) that may not be even easily infer looking at the json metadata, let alone the fact that it hampers human readability. 

> Let's say you acquire GRE data with both multiple echoes and multiple flip angles. You should be able to run the same pipeline on it as you would on MEGRE data, as long as you select the most appropriate fa files, but it's unclear to me whether you would still use MEGRE or need a new suffix.

Examples `ii` and `iii` above should clarify this to some extent. And the overlap would increase over time as new methods are developed. Files of two methods can be namesake when named with a generic suffix, and those methods may even appear like identical twins (`MPM` and `MTsat`), but they need different IDs.

But if two methods share the exact same framework and differ from each other depending on which parameters you alter (this is not the case for MPM and MTsat), then `qMRI application that can be derived from an existing suffix` becomes practical to describe inputs without the need of introducing a new suffix (`VFA` and `DESPOT` family). 

> Can you clarify what you mean by orphaning files?

All the files identified by a groping suffix are going to be taken as an input for processing, no file sharing a common suffix is going to be left out alone (sounded dramatic). But this is not going to be the case if you use `GRE` to identify both a high res `T1w` that is to be used for surface extraction, and multi-echo `GRE` in the same directory. That `T1w` image won't join the qMRI party, but still be there. Mostly confusing for a human reader, and not ideal for picking up files. 

@tsalo I did my best to address your points (around 1am in Turkey), happy to clarify more if what I said above does not make sense. 

I can see why `contrast` and `non-contrast` sounds like a good idea. On the other hand, a negating expression would not be really informative. I don't find declaring "what it is not for" really useful for explaining which function do they serve. This would also create a semantic obstacle for people who would like to use one of the images (e.g. higher FA, mt-off of MPM) outside qMRI pipelines.

Reviewer 6: @agahkarakuzu Thank you very much for explaining things in so much detail, and I'm sorry for the delay in responding in the PR.

I think there is a strong need for new suffixes for quantitative MRI protocols, and I agree that the concept of grouping multiple data acquisitions under the same suffix is necessary for qMRI as well.

However, I’d like to propose a compromise that I believe supports qMRI while fitting in with the current specification better, with the following changes:
1. A new concept for grouping multiple data acquisitions under the same suffix. This could be a concept rather than a suffix category, to allow for single-acquisition and multi-acquisition cases to share the same suffix. So we don’t need to assume that MPM scans, for example, came from separate acquisitions.
2. A new rule that files which only vary in multi-contrast entities (e.g., `echo`, `part`) must be associated. This will require clarifying language in the specification regarding these kinds of entities, and adding the caveat that, in cases where unassociated files differ only in these entities, the files should have at least one other (non-multi-contrast) entity to differentiate them (like `acq` or `run`).
    - This would resolve something that @tiborauer and @agahkarakuzu noted [in Mattermost](https://mattermost.brainhack.org/brainhack/pl/pc6ed7f9bfddbbohc8mminfubo), which is that, the way `run` is currently defined, if scans vary by a parameter (e.g., `echo`), then `run` should not be incremented. So, for example, we wouldn't know if `sub-X_task-Y_echo-1_bold.nii.gz` and `sub-X_task-Y_echo-2_bold.nii.gz` came from the same acquisition of not.
3. No new suffixes should be added that can be sufficiently dissociated based on the presence of entities. Thus, new suffixes are needed for frameworks with specific parameter values (e.g., `VFA`) but not for cases where a more general suffix combined with an entity would suffice (e.g., `MEGRE`). This prevents unnecessary redundancy, and tools for interacting with BIDS datasets (e.g., `pybids`) should be able to filter by the presence of entities and group associated files together easily.
    - @agahkarakuzu, this allows you to address the issue you raised above about distinguishing between protocols that only vary at the pulse sequence level by adding necessary suffixes, but while still making full use of the mechanisms already available in BIDS.

Reviewer 4: I agree with 1.
For 2., as far as I understand you suggest using the "non-multicontarst" entity as a grouping element? Would not be more consistent to use groping suffix? Otherwise, one might ask why do not we use the "non-multicontarst" entity for 1., too.
For 3., I am not sure what is the difference between VFA and MEGRE from your POV. Moreover, the issue identified in 2. also applies for MEGRE and MESE.

Reviewer 10: My impression from the derivatives discussion is that -- in general -- we'd like to avoid introducing many new suffixes, or heavily relying on them, as these can generally sprawl outwards somewhat indefinitely (though @effigies should correct me if that doesn't match his understanding). Because of that, I agree with @tsalo that it would be more consistent with the current spec to avoid new suffixes to the fullest extent possible.

Of course, there seem to be cases in qMRI where a new grouping suffix is absolutely necessary, and can't be disambiguated any other way. These seems to be the case of (1). But for ME-EPI, for example, I'd be against a new suffix. In that case, exactly as @tsalo suggested, we could keep the `_bold` suffix with the `echo` key-value pair, and that would sufficiently disambiguate the usage.

Reviewer: I think the conclusion ended up being "we should try to consider when we can use one suffix + a parameterized entity instead of N suffixes, but suffix proliferation is not entirely containable". As a example, the [functional derivative maps](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/bep012/05-derivatives/05-functional-derivatives.html#functional-derivatives-maps) ended up being a cluster of suffixes.

Reviewer 4: How do you distinguish the case of two EPI runs with different echo times from the case of ME-EPI with two echos?

Reviewer: `acq` is often used for this, though maybe it's a bit unusual for the entire difference in acquisition parameters to be something that has its own entity.

```
sub-01_acq-echo1_bold.nii.gz
sub-01_acq-echo2_bold.nii.gz
```

I don't think that indices have to form an obvious sequence, holding all other entities equal, so I would assume this would work:

```
sub-01_run-1_echo-1_bold.nii.gz
sub-01_run-2_echo-2_bold.nii.gz
```

I don't know if the validator would warn, but PyBIDS would certainly handle this smoothly.

Reviewer 4: The question is how can you tell if the two images are two EPI acquisitions with different TE, or the same (ME-EPI) acquisition?

Reviewer: I thought the context was that, if all entities but `echo-` match, then they are considered the same acquisition. I tried to give options for indicating two separate acquisitions.

If that's not the case, then I don't know.

Reviewer 10: I agree there's ambiguity in this case, but I see strong parallels with
similar ambiguities we encountered (and decided to live with) in
naturalistic stimuli such as movies.

In that case,  different researchers have interpreted continuous
collections of a movie (for example, the first ten minutes, then the second ten minutes) as corresponding to [_task-movie_run-01_, _task-movie_run-02_] *or*
to [_task-movie01_, _task-movie02_]. In the first case (which I find to be more common), it's unclear how to disambiguate repetitions of the same clip from one another.

You can [find the full discussion here,](https://groups.google.com/forum/m/#!topic/bids-discussion/Lk9Na1) but although I
haven't yet seen this case in a dataset I'd also imagine that `acq` would
be a logical way to distinguish these, or even `run` if they shared the
same task and were collected sequentially.

Reviewer 4: Thank you both, @effigies and @emdupre for the patience for this discussion. I think it is important to understand each others' motivation. Cross-modal discussions are also important to avoid overfitting and redundant solutions.

I can accept ambiguity in the interpretation of the data if there is no way to resolve it, and we should not forget the 80-20 rule (if it is still applicable). We can always attach descriptions and even pipelines to demonstrate the use case of the data.
What I also like to avoid is ambiguity in the spec. If we suggest `acq` or `run` should be used to group data, then we should not introduce grouping suffixes at all, because they can be applied to any modalities.

I do not work much with qMRI data, so I hope someone else from the qMRI community will jump in a correct me if I am wrong. But I also remember discussing suffixes within BEP001, and I was also against it for similar reasons you mentioned here. I admit that acquiring multiple instances of single-echo BOLD with different TEs is not common, and we can probably safely assume that it will not cause an issue. In qMRI, however, there may be more of such cases, as far as I understood. Also, the acquisition of fMRI data is much less diverse, and it can be safely resolved with a few simple entities. In qMRI, however, there is a whole new level of diversity. I myself was also astonished by it. And if we force it to be resolved with entities, then we end up either with complex labels describing many parameters at the same time (e.g. having multiple MT and MPM data at different resolutions), or a multitude of entities, which end up in very long filenames. Worse, we will all know what acquisitions certain combinations of parameters represent, and qMRI people will always use that name to them, which will eventually discourage them from using the spec.

Reviewer 6: Regarding this unfortunate ambiguity, I think that we should require delineation between acquisitions in cases where these multi-contrast (or perhaps better referred to as "within-acquisition") entities are used. This is part two of [my proposed compromise](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/508#discussion_r449232779). I do not know if it would be backwards incompatible to _require_ that additional entities be used to distinguish acquisitions in this case, but we can at least strongly recommend it until BIDS 2.0.

We could even, perhaps, start referring to entities as either **within-acquisition** or **between-acquisition**, to make the difference clearer. 

We also need to better define "data acquisition", "run", and the idea of "associated scans not acquired in the same acquisition" (e.g., MPM). The idea that associated scans not acquired in the same acquisition could share a suffix and only vary along within-acquisition entities would be a new concept to add to the specification, and would be particularly helpful for qMRI.

> Also, the acquisition of fMRI data is much less diverse, and it can be safely resolved with a few simple entities. In qMRI, however, there is a whole new level of diversity. I myself was also astonished by it. And if we force it to be resolved with entities, then we end up either with complex labels describing many parameters at the same time (e.g. having multiple MT and MPM data at different resolutions), or a multitude of entities, which end up in very long filenames.

I can understand the concept, but am still a little confused by this. This BEP _is_ introducing several new entities, so datatypes within a single multi-contrast protocol are still being distinguished by entities, even if they share the same suffix. I haven't seen cases where grouping suffix results in multiple files that don't use entities to produce unique filenames. While it is true that a truly generic suffix (e.g., `GRE`) and the proposed set of suffixes could not distinguish between certain protocols, that only requires some new suffixes (but not, necessarily, _grouping_ suffixes). I agree that the specification needs those new suffixes, but only in cases where current tools within the specification cannot properly distinguish between the scan types.

> Worse, we will all know what acquisitions certain combinations of parameters represent, and qMRI people will always use that name to them, which will eventually discourage them from using the spec.

I think it's a good idea to use the qMRI/ISMRM folks' terminology when we add new suffixes, but I don't think we should discard the mechanisms already built into the specification when those are sufficient to describe data.

> 3. I am not sure what is the difference between VFA and MEGRE from your POV. Moreover, the issue identified in 2. also applies for MEGRE and MESE.

My interpretation of what @agahkarakuzu said in this thread and on Mattermost was that in MEGRE you basically had a GRE where you could choose the echo times, and that would work fine, while for VFA it was a set protocol/framework. If that's not the case, and VFA is just a GRE with multiple flip angles, then I'd stick with that.

Reviewer 6: I think this thread can be resolved given the discussions we've had in other avenues. The general consensus was that these suffixes would remain, but the idea that multi-file groups would be set based on the _suffix_ (i.e., the idea of a grouping suffix) would be dropped.

| Multi-parametric mapping                   | MPM     | Grouping | Anatomical images for multiparametric mapping (a.k.a hMRI). The MPM approaches involves the acquisition of highly-similar anatomical images that differ in terms of application of a magnetization transfer RF pulse (MTon or MToff), flip angle and (optionally) echo time and magnitue/phase parts ([Weiskopf et al. 2013](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnins.2013.00095/full)). See [here](https://owncloud.gwdg.de/index.php/s/iv2TOQwGy4FGDDZ) for suggested MPM acquisition protocols.,_Associated output suffixes_:R1map, R2starmap, MTsat, PDmap, T1map, T2starmap                                               |

For example:

```Text
sub-01_fa-1_VFA.nii.gz
sub-01_fa-1_VFA.json
sub-01_fa-2_VFA.nii.gz
sub-01_fa-2_VFA.json
```

Please see the [entity table appendix]() for the REQUIRED and OPTIONAL entities

> for each `grouping suffix`. 

Reviewer 11: As I had mentioned in #371 in relation to this BEP, I think introducing new definitions such as "grouping suffix" IMHO should be suggested as an independent PR first and/or in parallel to the BEP.  That would allow for a better targeted review  of the proposed functionality.  Clumping everything together into a single PR makes it hard to impossible to provide adequate analysis/review of all aspects introduced and/or changed.

Also such new definitions should also be added to Glossary.
NB * - I do not think we have a term like that yet, but it is pretty much a list of "definitions" we have already in glossary: https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/02-common-principles.html#definitions

Reviewer 4: I think the "grouping suffix" could be a concept relevant beyond this BEP, and it should be, perhaps, added to the [Common principles](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/02-common-principles.html#file-name-structure).

Note that every image in a **grouped scan collection** has the same `_<suffix>` 
as they are supposed to be used together. Although the acquisitions will have
many identical acquisition parameters, only one-to-one-mapping is allowed
between a `.json`-sidecar file and an image in a grouped scan collection.
This follows directly from the
[inheritance principles of BIDS](../02-common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle):
parameter values that are identical across a set of grouped scans will still
have to be stored separately in each `.json`-sidecar file.

> ##### qMRI map suffixes 

Reviewer 6: Could/should this perhaps be moved to the Derivatives page? While qMRI maps can be created at the scanner, these are derived images and would primarily be created after acquisition, right?

Alternatively, it could be renamed to "Scanner-derived map suffixes", if the assumption is that these maps are generated at the scanner, since the same concept should apply to non-qMRI derived data.

Reviewer 4: We had lenghty discussions on this. The probelm is that they can be both scanner-derived and pipline-derived.

Reviewer: Recall also that any raw-like data can be turned into a derivative by adding `desc-` or `space-` keyword.

On the whole, I follow @yarikoptic's philosophy that the all data are derivative, and that blurring the line between raw and derivative isn't bad, as long as we preserve backwards compatibility.

Reviewer 6: @tiborauer @effigies Both of your points make sense, but if we want to support non-qMRI derived suffixes in the base specification (given that scanners can derive data that is not quantitative), do we really want to create a _fourth_ suffix group? Wouldn't it be better to keep an eye toward future BEPs with the name for this group of suffixes?

Reviewer 4: I agree with you, @tsalo. I can see two main kind of suffixes: 
- I would combine the existing Conventional suffixes and the qMRI map suffixes, because both of them refer to stand-alone acquitions. We could call them, perhaps, Stand-alone suffixes OSLT.
- The Grouping suffixes would refer to acquisitions, which belong together according to some specifed logic.

If desired, we can make subgroups by splitting the tables of, for example, Stand-alone suffixes into Contrast and Parameter (OSLT) suffixes.

**Function:**

Denotes the parameter contained within an individual file of a
quantitative parametric image.

> Changes to the specification is REQUIRED to

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Changes to the specification are REQUIRED to
```

Reviewer 9: @Gilles86 - if you give this a :+1: vote then I think we can go ahead and commit

|--------------------------------------------------------|-----------|--------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Longitudinal relaxation time map                       | T1map     | Parametric   | In seconds (s). T1 maps are REQUIRED to use this suffix irrespective of the method they are related to. _Can be generated from:_ `VFA`, `IRT1`, `MP2RAGE`, `MTS`,`MPM`. See [this interactive book on T1 mapping](https://qmrlab.org/t1_book/intro) for further reading on T1-mapping.  |
| True transverse relaxation time map                    | T2map     | Parametric   | In seconds (s). T2 maps are REQUIRED to use this suffix irrespective of the method they are related to. _Can be generated from:_ `MESE`, `MPM`                                                                                                                                       |

> | Observed transverse relaxation time map                | T2starmap | Parametric   | In seconds (s). T2\* maps are REQUIRED to use this suffix irrespective of the method they are related to._Can be generated from:_ `MEGRE`, `MPM`                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| Observed transverse relaxation time map                | T2starmap | Parametric   | In seconds (s). T2\* maps are REQUIRED to use this suffix irrespective of the method they are related to. _Can be generated from:_ `MEGRE`, `MPM`                                                                                                                                      |
```

| Magnetization transfer saturation index map            | MTsat     | Parametric   | In arbitrary units (a.u.). MTsat maps are REQUIRED to use this suffix irrespective of the method they are related to. _Can be generated from:_ `MTS`, `MPM`                                                                                                                          |
| Homogeneous (flat) T1-weighted image by MP2RAGE                 | UNIT1     | Parametric   | In arbitrary units (a.u.). UNIT1 images are REQUIRED to use this suffix irrespective of the method they are related to. Note that although this image is T1-weighted, regions without MR signal will contain white salt-and-pepper noise that most segmentation algorithms will fail on. Therefore, it is important to dissociate it from from `_T1w` _Can be generated from:_ `MP2RAGE`                                                                                                                             |

> | Longutidunal relaxation in rotating frame (T1 rho) map | T1rho     | Parametric   | In seconds (s). T1-rho maps are REQUIRED to use this suffix irrespective of the method they are related to. _Can be generated from:_ N/A                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| Longitudinal relaxation in rotating frame (T1 rho) map | T1rho     | Parametric   | In seconds (s). T1-rho maps are REQUIRED to use this suffix irrespective of the method they are related to. _Can be generated from:_ N/A                                                                                                                                             |
```

| Quantitative susceptibility map (QSM)                   | Chimap | Parametric   | In parts per million (ppm). QSM allows for determining the underlying magnetic susceptibility of tissue (Chi).  Chi-maps are usually constructed from the phase images of GRE sequences. Chi-maps are quantitative and are reconstructed by solving the magnetic field to susceptibility source inverse problem ([Wang & Liu, 2014](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.25358)). |

Quantitative maps can be obtained right off the scanner or by processing files
belonging to a `grouped scan collection`. Regardless of the method they are
obtained by, one of the `_suffix` entries listed in the table above is REQUIRED
for a proper naming. For example:

```Text
sub-01_T1map.nii.gz
sub-01_T1map.json
```
**Important:**

Quantitative unit of the parameter contained by a quantitative map MUST comply
with the unit description provided for its respective `_suffix` entry.
For example, a T1 map in milliseconds unit (ms) is not valid, given that the
description of the `T1map` suffix requires the parameter to be in seconds (s).

#### The `part` entity

> This entity shall be used to indicate which component of the complex representation

Reviewer 8: Should "shall" here be replaced with one of the RFC2119 terms?  SHALL or MUST? 

Or is it just:
```suggestion
This entity is used to indicate which component of the complex representation
```

Reviewer 4: +1 for "is"

Reviewer 9: @Gilles86 - if you give this a :+1: vote then I think we can go ahead and commit

of the MRI signal is represented in voxel data. The `part-<label>` key/value pair is
associated with the DICOM tag
[0008,9208](https://dicom.innolitics.com/ciods/enhanced-mr-image/enhanced-mr-image/00089208).

> Allowed label values for this entity are `phase`, `mag`, `real` and `imag`,

Reviewer 6: Should `part-complex` be supported too?

Author: @tsalo while  we were discussing about adding `real` and `imag` as supported `part` values for complex data, mixed type did not appear to be a common choice among many people. Do you know cases where it can be useful?

Reviewer 6: It's definitely not common to store complex data. The only thing I'm aware of that uses complex data right off the bat is [dwidenoise](https://mrtrix.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/commands/dwidenoise.html), but it _is_ supposed to be the first thing used (before any other preprocessing).

distinction (e.g. just between RARE and FLASH, or between RARE, FLASH, and
FLASHsubsampled) remains at the discretion of the researcher.

> #### The `echo` entity 

Reviewer 12: Does not specify any units in this section.

Author: @satra should not units be specified in the `EchoTime` entry of the `Timing Parameters`  metadata table? On the other hand, I totally agree with your [comment](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/508#issuecomment-661163395) regarding data types, happy to adapt BEP001 once there is a solution.

Reviewer 12: @agahkarakuzu - you are correct the units are in the timing table. perhaps what's needed is a link between the mention in this section and the link to the table. i know this is being discussed in a separate issue, so for this BEP, please feel free to resolve this issue for now.

If the value of `EchoTime` metadata field varies at least once across a collection 
of anatomical images having a common `grouping suffix`, the use of `echo-<index>`
key/value pair is REQUIRED. Note that only integers (from 1 to N) are allowed as
values to this entity for N different `EchoTime` parameter values. The actual 
`EchoTime` parameter values MUST NOT be explicitly declared by the entity. Instead, 
the parameter values are stored in sidecar json files and indexed by the `echo` entity

> in ascending order. For example: 

Reviewer 6: I believe that this would be backwards-incompatible (please see [this Google Group thread](https://groups.google.com/g/bids-discussion/c/Utv29uL0Bdc?pli=1)).

Reviewer 7: Shall we make at least make it a recommendation?

Reviewer 6: I think that would be great!

Author: @Gilles86 by recommendation, do you mean the following edit: 

```diff
Instead, the parameter values are stored in sidecar json files and 
+ RECOMMENDED 
to be indexed by the `echo` entity in ascending order. For example: 
```

Reviewer 10: Yes, this is something I added to the BIDS 2.0 doc as `REQUIRED`. The best we can do right now is recommend !

Reviewer 6: There is now an issue about making ascending `echo` ordering required for BIDS 2.0: https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-2-devel/issues/40.

| ContrastBolusIngredient | OPTIONAL. Active ingredient of agent. Values MUST be one of: IODINE, GADOLINIUM, CARBON DIOXIDE, BARIUM, XENON Corresponds to DICOM Tag 0018,1048. |
| RepetitionTimeExcitation | OPTIONAL. The time in seconds between successive excitation pulses that excite the same tissue. The DICOM tag that best refers to this parameter is [(0018, 0080)](http://dicomlookup.com/lookup.asp?sw=Tnumber&q=(0018,0080)). This field may be superseded by `RepetitionTimePreparation` for certain use cases, such as [MP2RAGE](https://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/172927/files/mp2rage.pdf). Use `RepetitionTimeExcitation` (in combination with `RepetitionTimePreparation` if needed) for anatomy imaging data rather than `RepetitionTime` as it is already defined as the amount of time that it takes to acquire a single volume in section 4.1.x. |
| RepetitionTimePreparation | OPTIONAL. The period of time in seconds that it takes a preparation pulse block to re-appear at the beginning of the succeeding (essentially identical) pulse sequence. |

##### Legacy suffixes (to be deprecated)

Some suffixes that were available in versions of the specification prior to

> 1.4.0. have been identified as legacy suffixes. The legacy sufficies generate
> inconsistencies and/or ambiguities with additional sufficies added in version
> 1.4.0 and so are therefore not recommended for use in new datasets. They are,
> however, still valid sufixes, to maintain backwards compatibility.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1.4.0. have been identified as legacy suffixes. The legacy suffixes generate
inconsistencies and/or ambiguities with additional suffixes added in version
1.4.0 and so are therefore not recommended for use in new datasets. They are,
however, still valid suffixes, to maintain backwards compatibility.
```

Reviewer 9: Thanks @tsalo!
